---
layout: post
title: "Matrix Factorization and Netflix Predictions"
date: 2019-07-27
---

I have been on a reading binge. I recently finish the first book in Siraj's recomended book reading list Incognito. The book explores our current understanding of neuroscience. I think it was a great first start for data science and more than that offers considerable insight into how we as humans process information and think. Theory of mind is pretty interesting and I think I might try to delve further into the topic. Its an interesting blend of science, philosophy, physics and introspection. Thinking about thinking naturally lends to thinking about ourselves and our own learning / consciousness. 

I've currently started reading the second book in the reading list which is How Smart Machines Think. Its an interesting foray into the last 20 years of data science and explores common topics in data science and the teams / researchers that have pushed our advances in that area. Its very well written and easy to digest. I think its a book I could very easily see myself recommending to anyone with an interest in data science. It is a good book for getting excited about artificial intelligence systems.

The chapter on the Netflix recommendation system was very interesting in particular. In the mid-2000s Netflix created a competition to create a new recommendation system for movie ratings. The task was quite clear -- create an algorithm that could predict how a particular user would rate a movie. The two strategies that were important to having an effective model were matrix factorization and model blending. Matrix factorization is described in the book with an example using genre affinity to assign a score for a user's particular affinity for the movie. In the example, a movie is composed of a blend of several genres; the matrix or array of genres is then multiplied by the user's affinity for that particular genre -- this affinity for genre is an array of weight values. The multiplied values are then added together to form a score to assign affinity for that movie for that user. Model blending is more straight forward; model blending is as the name implies the process of blending multiple models to reduce error variance and uncertainty. The important thing to watch out for with model blending is to make sure that the models are not correlated -- otherwise the blend will still carry considerable uncertainty. 